---
layout: post
title: "Proposition: forward-engineering biology using cell-free systems"
date: 2019-03-04
description: text

---

Biological systems are characterised by a wealth of interesting features. Living cells can sense and respond to their surroundings, and detect weak electrical and chemical signals in the midst of a chaotic, noisy environment. They can carry out complex chemistries and convert a variety of nutrients into dazzling new materials. They can perform computations, store information, and adapt, evolve, and proliferate themselves through changing environments, whether it is in the friendly warmth of a tropical rainforest or around the deepest superheated undersea vents. 

What if we could harness some of these features? What if we could learn from biology, and develop new technologies based on using biology as an engineering matrix? The possibilities would be truly revolutionary. Bioengineering has the potential to transform health, chemistry, materials, food, and energy, to mention only a few examples. By attempting to engineer biology, we are faced with the possibility of not only recreating natural features, but extending their capabilities beyond what nature has come up with through evolution. And in doing so, we will be able not only to build useful things, but maybe also learn the fundamental principles governing life. 

To successfully tackle this grand challenge of harnessing biology for technology, I propose that we should apply tried-and-tested engineering principles to our approach. While much of bioengineering thus far has involved *reverse* engineering, that is, refactoring existing biological systems in different contexts to achieve a function, I argue that it may be necessary to carry out *forward* engineering to truly enable biotechnology. By this, I mean that we should aim to design and construct biological systems from the bottom up, using standard parts, and whose behaviour can be quantitatively and predictively modelled mathematically. 

While there certainly exist critics of this approach, bottom-up approaches to engineering biological functions have already been carried out successfully. As a facetious example, take that of flight: the first successful examples to recreate what was then a purely biological function of flight did not directly emulate the behaviour of birds. Rather, the plane is an example of the distillation of the most salient features of birds, which achieves the same function, but which is entirely forward-engineered. And while engineering planes has taught us (admittedly little) about birds, it has taught us much more about flight, and led to undoubtedly useful applications.

Can we distill the most salient features of cells into a system which is forward-engineered, and which can also produce useful applications?

My ultimate goal, and that shared by many in the field, is thus to achieve forward-engineering in biological systems. As a concrete example, this would be to reprogram a living cell to carry out a defined function, with quantitative predictability. 

While cellular behaviour can be modulated in a variety of ways, the canonical approach is through introducing novel gene regulatory networks (GRNs), which are the most basic (and well-studied) level of regulation in a cell. GRNs are composed of sets of interacting genes, each of which can turn on or off another gene. Through varying the topology of the network, as well as the sign of each connection, static functions like switches and logical computations as well as dynamic functions like pulses and oscillations in the gene expression can be generated. 

Quantitatively reprogramming a cell by introducing GRNs is an extremely tough proposition. To understand why, consider an idealised design of a cell. In this ideal case, each function within the cell would be self-contained; it would only interact with other functions through a few well-characterised connections. This property of engineered systems is known as modularity. Any synthetic GRN you introduce would also interact through a small number of defined channels. The quantitative properties of all the components would be known, and thus mathematical models could be created to describe the whole system.

By constrast, in a living cell, interactions between subsystems are numerous and intricate, and any introduced GRN also interacts through many channels. When you try to measure quantitative properties of your parts, they seem to change depending on the conditions of your experiment. This is known as 'context-dependence', and arises when you have not taken into account all the interactions. It is thus very difficult to write down a mathematical model which accurately describes the system; as a result, forward engineering as we described earlier is essentially impossible. 

What I propose is therefore that we try to build systems which have these idealised properties in the first place. An approach to doing this is to embrace cell-free systems, which are minimal biochemical reactions which capture some salient features of a living cell. In adopting such an approach, we regain control over the interactions within the system, and we have a system simplified enough that it can be described reasonably accurately by mathematical models.  

Therefore, instead of solving the very complex problem of attempting to engineer a cell, I will instead solve the simpler problem of attempting to engineer and develop cell-free systems. In doing so, I hope to, like the plane and the bird, create systems with immediate usefulness, but which may also teach us something about how to reprogram a real cell. 