---
layout: post
title: "Control theory and synthetic biology"
date: 2019-08-22
description: This is a summary of a review paper about control theory and synthetic biology.

---

Del Vecchio et al., **Future systems and control research in synthetic biology**, *Annu Rev Control* 2018 [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcontrol.2018.04.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcontrol.2018.04.007)

I will shortly be attending the [SynBioControl](http://sysos.eng.ox.ac.uk/wiki/index.php/SynBioControl2019) conference at Oxford, and so this week I'm doing some preparatory reading. Today I read a great review on the opportunities for control engineering in synthetic biology, which I'll summarise here. 

The essential idea of the review is that many of synthetic biology's current problems are 'system-level'. That is, they are caused by complex dynamical interactions and uncertainty in system parameters, which are not easily solved merely by making new parts or characterising their behaviour more accurately. The proposed solutions draw on ideas and techniques from the field of control engineering, which was developed to tackle similar challenges; a famous historical example of this is the closed-loop feedback amplifier, which made amplification of electrical signals robust to variations in the properties of the fragile amplifier itself. However, directly applying control theoretic concepts to biolgical systems is plagued with difficulties, which the authors discuss before outlining some promising approaches. 

What are synthetic biology's main problems? The authors identified three broad challenges:

	* Lack of compositionality - We are able to design complex engineered systems not by taking into account all the complexity, but by abstracting large sections of the system into modules whose behaviour is governed by fixed rules. If we do this in biology, what we quickly discover is that the rules (and even the module boundaries) do not remain fixed: parts of our system will behave differently depending on the exact conditions. This is known as context dependence, and its consequence is that we are not able to compose modules together in a predictable way, thus severely limiting the complexity of systems we can build.

	* Stochasticity - Biological systems are stochastic, both at the molecular level, where processes like transcription and translation operate under conditions of low molecular numbers, as well as at the population level, where genetically identical cells exhibit heterogeneous behaviour. We are currently unable to scale up mathematical descriptions of these stochastic processes, due to computational challenges in approximating the governing stochastic equations as well as connecting stochastic modules together.

	* Spatial distribution of dynamics - At the biomolecular level, processes are spatially organised in cells, and thus transcription and translation (especially in prokaryotic cells) have a spatial context dependence. At the population level, cellular behaviour is also spatially varying. Mathematically, it is not currently possible to describe the observation that a population consisting of heterogenous, dynamic cells, whose properties vary between members over time as well as over large spatial scales, can reach some optimal goal at steady state, and is robust to perturbations away from that goal.

There are a number of possible approaches to tackle these grand challenges in order to come up with a robust design: by improving models, by applying control, and by bioinspired design. 

Models can be improved by isolating and characterising context-dependence, for instance by perturbing a synthetic gene circuit in its cellular context. This requires high quality perturbations and measurement, and improved system identification techniques which optimise the measurement strategy and provide rational selection criteria for the possible models. The mathematical framework of the model itself can also be improved, as there is no current consensus on the most appropriate general framework, with a large number of approaches being applied in different conditions.

Feedback control is a way by which uncertainties in context can be effectively managed: adaptation and homeostasis are examples in nature, which rely on integral feedback. Despite many efforts, perfect integral control has not yet been achieved in biomolecular circuits, due to many proposed mechanisms requiring infinite binding affinity between two species, and dilution of components due to cell growth. Other modes of control, such as antithetic control or as-yet unknown biological mechanisms, may be more effective. The major problem facing feedback control is that the controller itself is subject to parametric uncertainty and noise, and it is not clear how to design controllers with non-ideal components. 

Rather than taking a model-based approach, it may be instead more fruitful to search for circuit architectures which exhibit the required robustness properties, for instance by high-throughput direct evolutionary design. In this way, we use nature's own methods to come up with working solutions. It may also be instructive to use architectures which are more closely bio-inspired, for instance those with redundancy, crosstalk, or whose functions are distributed over many cells and thus become robust to single-cell variability. 

The earliest synthetic biological designs, such as the repressilator and toggle switch, were truly model-based: the number of components was small, and the entire system could be accurately modelled. As the field developed, we have moved further away from that initial point, with the result being that today modelling and experimentation are separated. It will require both that theorists become more aware of experimental constraints and degrees of freedom, and that experimentalists become aware of the theoretical challenges, before a synergy between the two can once more be obtained. 











